Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project.
Interviewer Steve Fletcher.
Interviewee Ewan Lewis. The location of the interview is the Swicker office.
And today's date is the 3rd of October 2015.
Ewan, would you be kind enough to spell your name in full for the record?
Of course, Ewan Lewis. I-W-A-N-L-E-W-I-S.
For the rest of this reminiscence, I will of course be referring to you as Jeeves.
For that is your nickname. And everyone in the company knows and loves you as Jeeves.
Which is probably a good question to start with. Why are you called Jeeves?
Very good question actually Steve. Spanned from, let's see, going back many years now in the school days.
There was a bunch of us, a bunch of guys who studied electronics.
And it sort of got to the point of, well, should we say I was a bit of a spoff in electronics.
Nothing quite like what I am now.
So, yeah, there was just a few random questions that were sort of brought on by the teacher.
Nobody seemed to know the answer. And it was sort of passed down the line as you could imagine in a school environment.
Nudging the person to your left was the answer to number one.
And it sort of got to one of the guys, James I think it was, and he went, I don't know, ask Jeeves over there.
And it sort of stayed from there. I never had a nickname before moving through school or anything.
I took the fancy to Jeeves.
I have to say you're the only Jeeves I know of. Have you met any other in real life?
I know of no other Jeeves whatsoever.
There's a uniqueness to your Jeeve velocity which is all yours.
Yeah, quite.
Well, let's try and think back now to when we first met each other.
I can recall going down to Cardiff Bay, which obviously had been redeveloped.
Yeah.
And there in front of the New Wales Millennium Centre was a piece of ground, an area which we called the Oval Basin.
But I think its official name is Plas Roald Dahl.
You could be right.
Yeah, absolutely. Most of us know it as the Oval Basin.
It's a basin and it's oval shaped.
Quite right.
That's common parlance for you.
And to my joy and amazement, I saw a group of young people bocking.
So I was introduced to, I saw bocking.
What were you all up to?
Last sunny Sunday afternoon?
I ask myself this many, many, many times over what we were doing down there.
So, well, yeah, let's start from the start.
The reason we're bocking in its entirety is basically, if you can imagine the prosthetics that you see some of those Paralympians running with the blades,
it's basically one of them, but for fully bodied people.
So they're a stilt in essence with a carbon fibre blade on the back that propels you nine, 10 foot up in the air and allows you to run 30 miles an hour by taking nine foot strides.
And my first, you know, the sheer movement and kinetic movement.
I mean, here was a group of lads and I think one or two girls as well who were not really sort of taking like giant leaps as if they were on the moon.
But we're doing somersaults, back somersaults, flips sideways.
What were some of the moves that I would have seen?
Well, you would have seen some basic stuff.
Well, let's start with a jump in.
So a kanga hop.
Imagine a kangaroo jumping away.
So that's one of the basic things.
But then you evolve them into some stunts similar to that of skateboarding.
So you'd have a spring grab.
You do a split kick.
Star jumps would be another one.
And then until you sort of get onto the more technical movements then of somersaults, back flips, jumping up and down big, huge blocks.
You know, just think of the sort of gymnastic things, stuff you'd see on the spring floor or a trampoline.
I suppose that's one way to describe it.
You've got a trampoline on each foot.
That's brilliant.
You know, in Swicko and in Cardiff Carnival we've had for a number of years, we've had still performers, some of them professional, who then taught others to move around.
And whilst it gave us the height and sometimes if you got somebody moving on four stilts,
you know, you had fun to play with in terms of costume.
It didn't give us the levity.
I mean, you guys seem to be like sort of fleas on a God knows what, a diseased tramp.
You were bouncing around.
There was all this energy.
So somehow not only were you higher than everybody else because you're on stilts and you're raised up,
but as you say, you appear to have a couple of coil springs or springy old jacks you look like.
It was quite a revelation for me.
So it was quite important to go over and say hello.
I met the Bokkers, yourself and somebody else who was to feature heavily in the Cardiff Carnival Bocking story.
Your cohort, Dom, who I think we have to pay tribute to.
He can't be here today because he's celebrating his 21st birthday on route to New York, I believe.
Yeah, jammy person.
Yeah, definitely.
So, um, met yourself and the other Bokkers.
And at that time, besides doing the annual carnival, Swickr was trying to think how how we could develop carnivals and art form.
And sometimes in the history of the carnival, we have attempted, particularly when we had effectively a stage in front of the National Museum of Wales to tell a story of sorts.
And I went back to that idea and thought, like, how can we, with a smaller group of people, try and begin and tell stories through carnival arts, through the making the movement and by bringing on new and interesting art forms and cultural phenomena.
And of course, Bocking fell into that, didn't it?
It did. Yeah.
It did. Yeah, well, and truly, I mean, it was it was something that I wasn't aware of, of you guys before you approached us.
And, you know, as you just explained, it was something that you'd never seen before.
And I think it did bring a certain sort of uniqueness to what it was.
And, you know, with the flow of everything, when we're up on stilts, not being able to stand still.
So it was always that constant sort of flow and movement when we sort of started to get into the carnival and Swickr with you guys, obviously,
along with all of the sort of costumes that we were wearing and the dressage and everything.
It was a very unique sort of style.
Yes, I think I believe.
Yeah.
The very first production was, of course, Dragons.
And we were trying to tell through our own sort of carnival prism, the story of the Merlin's prophecy of the eternal battle between the white Anglo-Saxon dragon.
Boo, his Celtic red dragon.
So, yes, you and fellow bockers featured in Dragon.
What are your memories of that?
Do you still wake up screaming?
OK, just for the record, we were all quite new to the actual bocking event or to the bocking sort of skill set.
So there was only a select few of us that could perform to the standards that you were looking for.
But no, I look back on it with with great memories, lots of fun.
It was a really good time.
It was a good sort of bonding session with not just us as the bockers, to which we sort of established over the last year or so, but with you guys as well, being part of something, being able to show our skills off with more people, with more crowds and venturing into different avenues that we never thought that we could possibly get into.
So it was a tremendous sort of success for on, you know, a partnership between us as the bockers and yourself as Swicker, you know, just propelled us without no puns, you know, well and truly into the next stage.
The atmosphere.
I mean, the crowds always loved you guys on parade.
Of course, Carnival Theatre, we followed up.
Dragons with magic.
Of course you played a pivotal role in that magic.
The story of Dr.
John D.
And of course, who uses the myth of the 11th century discovery of the new world by Prince Maddock and who gets to play Prince Maddock on stills.
Would you care to tell us what you were dressed on?
What was that like?
Because you had to, you had to, you had to, on jumping stills, on bocking stills, you had to move from North Wales right across the Atlantic to the new world, to America, didn't you?
I thought that was quite fun.
Yeah, that was just us down to a tee really, getting from one space to another in the most exciting way possible, I think.
And, you know, on jumping stills, why not?
Dressed in Welsh gear, so the Welsh flags, the vests, I think we had kilts on as well, going from one side, Wales, over to the other, to the new world, over to America to face off with the Indians, if I recall correctly.
Jumping around and performing and somersaulting and nearly landing on backsides a few times.
Have you ever fallen off, Jeeves?
Of course.
There we are.
Isn't it a secret to falling off and not, because you're here, you're hailed, you're hearty, you didn't actually limp into the room.
No, no, I was quite one of the fortunate ones, I think.
I managed to get away, scaved only with bruises and cuts.
Yeah, right.
Don't get me wrong, you know, the sport did attract us dangers.
There were a few people that broke their legs, their collarbones, etc.
Don being one of them, breaking his collarbone.
A few coccyxes along the way, if that's the correct word for plural of coccyx, I'm not too sure.
More than one coccyx?
Yeah, more than one coccyx.
We'll go and look at that in the future.
But yeah, definitely, you know, it was definitely one of the extreme sports.
Like I said, it did draw us dangers.
So not only did you join us in our carnival theatre ventures, but of course, you and Dom in particular, I think you often used to lead parades when you were with us, or you were sort of like outriders, or you didn't have to stay with a section, did you?
No, we didn't.
As you say, you were about constant movement.
Yes, definitely.
I mean, I think it was a more of a scene or a, I don't know, let's see, a parade of such for us to run basically up and down the whole length of the carnival.
It can't tie us down to one place, you know what we like to do.
You know, it brought a little bit of excitement to it because not only was obviously the general public viewing each section in a stage, but then sort of saw us, I suppose, as a bit of the jesters just running around making a muck.
Well, you had that wild card feel about with you, which is that you didn't have to relate to one set of music or one group or one set of costumes.
No, definitely not.
You were like our guardians or our pioneers.
And how often you were at the front, I seem to remember, helping sort of, you know, almost like...
To clear the way, I think.
To clear the way.
Move.
Bounce, bounce, bounce.
And also probably out in the front was the only place because this is, I mean, entirely to your credit, you and Dom, but even during the course of a parade, you would still find times.
And perhaps that's because you were out in the front and we had to stop for road closings and whatever.
I remember if we could clear a space of how much do you normally leave, about 50 meters or something like that?
Yeah, something along that.
You could run up, don't you?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, yeah, we're there by the side of Howells.
There's hundreds of people around.
This is the one I like.
I don't know why it stays with me because of the sound flash.
How did it feel performing to that number of people in the middle of town during a parade on a sunny day?
We did have them occasionally.
Yes, we did.
Yeah, living in Wales, surprisingly.
We create the atmosphere of, you know, and everything from the run up of the crowd going, ooh, to, you know, yeah.
What did it feel like?
Well, before we even get to that bit, I mean, I think it's just worth to mention that we had a small group of us on that particular day.
I think there was about six of us.
And I'd actually gone on holidays just before this parade and left it to my good friends to come up with a design for a costume for the lot of us.
And I ended up coming back to the most flamboyant boiler suit ever, I believe,
with purple sequins and whatnot, courtesy of Adrian.
And but yeah, so anyway, with all of that on, looking slightly tanned as well from my holiday, going back to that moment, performing all the way up from I think it was from City Hall, making our way around the route, getting to that point of towels.
Enough was enough for me.
I needed to sit down and to have a bit of a break and it turned into a little spectacle, I think.
Masses of crowds around us and that small little corridor by howls.
And I mean, the atmosphere was just amazing because Dom was performing, ended up doing front flips over me, jumping with me stood up.
So, you know, that was me being nearly seven foot, probably seven and a half foot on stilts.
With the stilts on.
Yeah, with the stilts on.
He's tall anyway.
Yeah.
And Dom, you know, jumping straight over me, sort of straddling me.
The crowd just going nuts, obviously, because they could just see the, it doesn't matter how far away they were with us stood up at seven foot with Dom jumping nine foot up in the air.
It just attracted crowds of people.
And then the girls performing the sort of can-can dance and little sequence of other little tricks and whatnot.
It was just amazing.
And all it was was a little break.
That's what it did.
It was our little break just to sort of have five.
The crowd went wild, didn't it?
I mean, proper full on cheering and chanting and sort of, you know, that whole willy wonky do it dance stuff.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
I mean, talk about, you know, sitting on the edge of your seat, you know, you would sort of start with either a run up and then tease the crowd, obviously run back, go again or just sort of.
Just sort of jump there for a couple of seconds.
You know, is he going to go?
Is he not, you know, to build up the momentum?
And I think at one point we even had the crowd do the sort of drum roll.
And then when it did happen, it was a big, massive cheer of like, whoa, it was amazing, amazing sort of atmosphere to be in.
And then moving off then to the next bit.
Absolutely.
So what can I say other than it's been a joy talking to you.
I wish at this point to award the invisible mythical but entirely worthwhile award of Cardiff Parliament Hero to Jeeves.
And I'm sure you're going to pass on some of this award to Dom.
Oh, my class a fraction.
You're like a dynamic duo.
It was Jeeves and Dom.
It was. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So you're in this Jeeves.
I hear about you play your car hero.
Thank you very much indeed.
Thank you very much.